doc/docs/Scheme_Tutorials/Material_Dispersion.md, before:

---
# Material Dispersion
---

In these two examples, we will perform simulations with a **frequency-dependent dielectric** ε(ω), corresponding to **material dispersion**. See [Materials](../Materials/#material-dispersion) for more information on how material dispersion is supported.

[TOC]

### Reflectance Spectrum of Air-Fused Quartz Interface

We will compute the broadband [reflectance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflectance) spectrum at normal incidence for a planar interface of vacuum/air and [fused quartz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fused_quartz) (or fused silica). As a validation, we will compare the simulated result with the analytic reflectance computed using the [Fresnel equations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fresnel_equations).

The wavelength-dependent, lossless permittivity of fused quartz, measured experimentally at 20$^\circ$, can be approximated by the [Sellmeier equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sellmeier_equation):

$$\varepsilon(\lambda) = 1 + \frac{0.6961663\lambda^2}{\lambda^2-0.0684043^2} + \frac{0.4079426\lambda^2}{\lambda^2-0.1162414^2} + \frac{0.8974794\lambda^2}{\lambda^2-9.896161^2}$$

The wavelength λ is in units of microns. This equation is valid from 0.21 to 6.7 μm. The Sellmeier form for the permittivity of fused quartz can be imported into Meep as a [Lorentzian susceptibility](Materials/#material-dispersion) via a slight reorganization to convert the wavelength dependence into frequency. This is implemented in the [materials library](https://github.com/stevengj/meep/blob/master/scheme/examples/materials-library.scm#L39-L56).

The simulation involves a 1d cell. A planewave current source with a pulsed profile spanning visible wavelengths of 0.4 to 0.8 μm is normally incident on the quartz from air. The reflectance is computed using the convention of two separate runs: (1) an empty cell to obtain the incident power, and (2) with the quartz to obtain the reflected power. This is demonstrated in a [separate tutorial](Basics/#transmission-spectrum-around-a-waveguide-bend). The grid resolution, and by direct extension the time resolution via the [Courant condition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Courant%E2%80%93Friedrichs%E2%80%93Lewy_condition), must be made sufficiently fine to obtain agreement with the analytic results and to ensure [numerical stability](Materials/#numerical-stability). Coarse resolutions may lead to field instabilities. The simulation script is below and in [refl-quartz.ctl](https://github.com/stevengj/meep/blob/master/scheme/examples/refl-quartz.ctl).

```scm
(include "/path/to/materials-library.scm")

(set-param! resolution 400) ; pixels/um

(define-param sz 10)
(set! geometry-lattice (make lattice (size no-size no-size sz)))
(set! dimensions 1)

(define lambda-min 0.4)
(define lambda-max 0.8)
(define fmax (/ lambda-min))
(define fmin (/ lambda-max))
(define fcen (* 0.5 (+ fmax fmin)))
(define df (- fmax fmin))

(define dpml 1.0)
(set! pml-layers (list (make pml (thickness dpml))))

(set! k-point (vector3 0 0 0))

(set! sources (list (make source (src (make gaussian-src (frequency fcen) (fwidth df))) (component Ex) (center 0 0 (+ (* -0.5 sz) dpml)))))

(define-param empty? true)

(if (not empty?)
    (set! geometry (list (make block (size infinity infinity (* 0.5 sz)) (center 0 0 (* 0.25 sz)) (material fused-quartz)))))

(define nfreq 50)
(define refl (add-flux fcen df nfreq (make flux-region (center 0 0 (* -0.25 sz)))))

(if (not empty?) (load-minus-flux "refl-flux" refl))

(run-sources+ (stop-when-fields-decayed 50 Ex (vector3 0 0 (+ (* -0.5 sz) dpml)) 1e-9))

(if empty? (save-flux "refl-flux" refl))

(display-fluxes refl)
```
The following Bash shell script runs the two simulations, pipes the output to a file, and extracts the flux data into a separate file.

```sh
#!/bin/bash

meep empty?=true refl-quartz.ctl |tee flux0.out
grep flux1: flux0.out |cut -d , -f2- > flux0.dat

meep empty?=false refl-quartz.ctl |tee flux.out
grep flux1: flux.out |cut -d , -f2- > flux.dat
```

A plot of the reflectance spectrum based on the simulated data and the analytic Fresnel equations is generated using the Octave/Matlab script below. The plot is shown in the accompanying figure. There is agreement between the simulated and analytic results. Note that the reflectance spectra is plotted as a function of wavelength, not frequency from which the Meep data is obtained. Thus, the data points are not equally spaced: the spacing is smaller at low wavelengths (high frequencies) than at high wavelengths (low frequencies).

```matlab
f0 = dlmread("flux0.dat",",");
f = dlmread("flux.dat",",");

lambdas = 1./f(:,1);
R = -f(:,2)./f(:,2);

eps_silica = @(l) 1+(0.6961663*l.^2)./(l.^2-0.0684043^2)+(0.4079426*l.^2)./(l.^2-0.1162414^2)+(0.8974794*l.^2)./(l.^2-9.896161^2);
R_fresnel = @(l) abs((1-eps_silica(l).^0.5)./(1+eps_silica(l).^0.5)).^2;

plot(lambdas,R,'bo-',lambdas,R_fresnel(lambdas),'rs-');
xlabel("wavelength (um)");
ylabel("reflectance");
legend("meep","analytic");

```

<center>
![](../images/fused_quartz_reflectance_spectrum.png)
</center>

### Permittivity Function of an Artificial Dispersive Material

We will model a *uniform medium* of an artificial dispersive material. From the dispersion relation ω(k), we will compute the numerical ε(ω) via the formula:

$$\varepsilon(\omega) = \left( \frac{ck}{\omega} \right) ^2$$

We will then compare this with the analytical ε(ω) that we specified. The simulation script is in [material-dispersion.ctl](https://github.com/stevengj/meep/blob/master/scheme/examples/material-dispersion.ctl).

Since this is a uniform medium, our computational cell can actually be of *zero* size (i.e. one pixel), where we will use Bloch-periodic boundary conditions to specify the wavevector *k*.

```scm
(set! geometry-lattice (make lattice (size no-size no-size no-size)))
(set-param! resolution 20)
```

We will then fill all space with a dispersive material:

```scm
(set! default-material
      (make dielectric (epsilon 2.25)
            (E-susceptibilities 
             (make lorentzian-susceptibility
               (frequency 1.1) (gamma 1e-5) (sigma 0.5))
             (make lorentzian-susceptibility
               (frequency 0.5) (gamma 0.1) (sigma 2e-5))
             )))
```

corresponding to the dielectric function:

$$\varepsilon(\omega) = \varepsilon(2\pi f) = 2.25 + \frac{1.1^2 \cdot 0.5}{1.1^2 - f^2 -if \cdot 10^{-5}/2\pi} + \frac{0.5^2 \cdot 2\cdot 10^{-5}}{0.5^2 - f^2 -if \cdot 0.1 / 2\pi}$$

The real and imaginary parts of this dielectric function ε(ω) are plotted below:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-eps.png)
</center>

We can see that the f=1.1 resonance causes a large change in both the real and imaginary parts of ε around that frequency. In fact, there is a range of frequencies from 1.1 to 1.2161 where ε is *negative*. In this range, no propagating modes exist &mdash; it is actually a kind of electromagnetic band gap associated with polariton resonances in a material. For more information on the physics of such materials, see e.g. Chapter 14 of [Introduction to Solid State Physics](http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-EHEP000803.html) by C. Kittel.

On the other hand, the f=0.5 resonance, because the `sigma` numerator is so small, causes very little change in the real part of ε. Nevertheless, it generates a clear peak in the *imaginary* part of ε, corresponding to a resonant absorption peak.

Now, we'll set up the rest of the simulation. We'll specify a broadband $E_z$-polarized Gaussian source, create a list of *k* wavevectors that we want to compute ω(k) over, and compute the associated frequencies by using the `run-k-points` function:

```scm
(define-param fcen 1.0)
(define-param df 2.0)
(set! sources (list (make source
                      (src (make gaussian-src (frequency fcen) (fwidth df)))
                      (component Ez) (center 0 0 0))))
(define-param kmin 0.3)
(define-param kmax 2.2)
(define-param k-interp 99)
(define kpts (interpolate k-interp (list (vector3 kmin) (vector3 kmax))))
(define all-freqs (run-k-points 200 kpts)) ; a list of lists of frequencies  
```

The `run-k-points` function returns a *list of lists* of frequencies &mdash; one list of complex frequencies for each *k* point &mdash; which we store in the `all-freqs` variable. Finally, we want to loop over this list and print out the corresponding ε via the ratio (ck/ω)$^2$ as described above. To do this, we will use the Scheme `map` function, which applies a given function to every element of a list (or lists), and since we have a list of lists we'll actually nest two `map` functions:

```scm
(map (lambda (kx fs)
       (map (lambda (f)
              (print "eps:, " (real-part f) ", " (imag-part f)
                     ", " (sqr (/ kx f)) "\n"))
            fs))
     (map vector3-x kpts) all-freqs)
```

Alternatively we could just read all of the frequencies into Octave/Matlab and compute the ratios there. After running the program with

```sh
unix% meep material-dispersion.ctl | tee material-dispersion.out
```

we can then `grep` for the frequencies and the computed dielectric function, and plot it. First, let's plot the dispersion relation ω(k) for the real part of ω:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-bands.png)
</center>

The red circles are the computed points from Meep, whereas the blue line is the analytical band diagram from the specified ε(ω). As you can see, we get *two* bands at each *k*, separated by a polaritonic gap (shaded yellow). This dispersion relation can be thought of as the interaction (anti-crossing) between the light line of the ambient ε=2.25 material (dashed black line) and the horizontal line corresponding to the phonon resonance.

Similarly, the computed and analytical real parts of the dielectric function are given by:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-epsre.png)
</center>

which shows excellent agreement between the analytical (blue line) and numerical (red circles) calculations. The imaginary part, however, is more subtle:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-epsim.png)
</center>

The blue line is the analytical calculation from above and the red circles are the numerical value from Meep &mdash; why is the agreement so poor? There is nothing wrong with Meep, and this is *not* a numerical error. The problem is simply that we are comparing apples and oranges.

The blue line is the analytical calculation of ε(ω) for a *real* frequency ω which corresponds to solutions with a *complex* wavevector *k*, whereas Meep is computing ε at a *complex* ω for a *real* wavevector *k*. So, the correct comparison is to plug Meep's *complex* ω into the analytical formula for ε(ω), which results in the green lines on the graph that fall almost on top of the red circles.

Why did our comparison of the *real* part of ε look so good, then? The reason is that ε(ω) at real and complex values of ω are closely related by the analytic properties of ε. In particular, because ε is an analytic function on the real-ω axis, adding a *small* imaginary part to ω as we are doing here does not change ε by much. The losses are small for all of the computed *k* points. The change was only significant for the imaginary ε because the imaginary ε was small to begin with.

Commit message:

overhaul Basics tutorials in documentation and expand Materials Library (#339)
* overhaul Basics tutorials in documentation and expand Materials Library

* minor tweaks and fixes

* fixes

* comma

doc/docs/Scheme_Tutorials/Material_Dispersion.md, after:

---
# Material Dispersion
---

In these two examples, we will perform simulations with a **frequency-dependent dielectric** ε(ω), corresponding to **material dispersion**. See [Materials](../Materials/#material-dispersion) for more information on how material dispersion is supported.

[TOC]

### Reflectance Spectrum of Air-Silica Interface

We will compute the broadband [reflectance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflectance) spectrum at normal incidence for a planar interface of vacuum/air and [fused quartz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fused_quartz) (silica). As a validation, we will compare the simulated result with the analytic reflectance computed using the [Fresnel equations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fresnel_equations). This is similar to an example in [Tutorial/Basics](Basics/#angular-reflectance-spectrum-of-a-planar-interface) which involved computing the angular reflectance spectrum at a single wavelength.

The wavelength-dependent, lossless permittivity of fused quartz, measured experimentally at 20$^\circ$, can be approximated by the [Sellmeier equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sellmeier_equation):

$$\varepsilon(\lambda) = 1 + \frac{0.6961663\lambda^2}{\lambda^2-0.0684043^2} + \frac{0.4079426\lambda^2}{\lambda^2-0.1162414^2} + \frac{0.8974794\lambda^2}{\lambda^2-9.896161^2}$$

The wavelength λ is in units of microns. This equation is valid from 0.21 to 6.7 μm. The Sellmeier form for the permittivity of fused quartz can be imported into Meep as a [Lorentzian susceptibility](Materials/#material-dispersion) via a slight reorganization to convert the wavelength dependence into frequency. This is implemented in the [materials library](https://github.com/stevengj/meep/blob/master/scheme/examples/materials-library.scm#L39-L56).

The simulation involves a 1d cell. A planewave current source with a pulsed profile spanning visible wavelengths of 0.4 to 0.8 μm is normally incident on the quartz from air. The reflectance is computed using the convention of two separate runs: (1) an empty cell to obtain the incident power, and (2) with the quartz to obtain the reflected power. The details of this type of calculation are described in [Tutorial/Basics](Basics/#transmission-spectrum-of-a-waveguide-bend). The grid resolution, and by direct extension the time resolution via the [Courant condition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Courant%E2%80%93Friedrichs%E2%80%93Lewy_condition), must be made sufficiently fine to obtain agreement with the analytic results and to ensure [numerical stability](Materials/#numerical-stability). Coarse resolutions may lead to field instabilities.

The simulation script is below and in [refl-quartz.ctl](https://github.com/stevengj/meep/blob/master/scheme/examples/refl-quartz.ctl).

```scm
(include "/path/to/materials-library.scm")

(set-param! resolution 400) ; pixels/um

(define-param sz 10)
(set! geometry-lattice (make lattice (size no-size no-size sz)))
(set! dimensions 1)

(define lambda-min 0.4)
(define lambda-max 0.8)
(define fmax (/ lambda-min))
(define fmin (/ lambda-max))
(define fcen (* 0.5 (+ fmax fmin)))
(define df (- fmax fmin))

(define dpml 1.0)
(set! pml-layers (list (make pml (thickness dpml))))

(set! k-point (vector3 0 0 0))

(set! sources (list (make source (src (make gaussian-src (frequency fcen) (fwidth df))) (component Ex) (center 0 0 (+ (* -0.5 sz) dpml)))))

(define-param empty? true)

(if (not empty?)
    (set! geometry (list (make block (size infinity infinity (* 0.5 sz)) (center 0 0 (* 0.25 sz)) (material fused-quartz)))))

(define nfreq 50)
(define refl (add-flux fcen df nfreq (make flux-region (center 0 0 (* -0.25 sz)))))

(if (not empty?) (load-minus-flux "refl-flux" refl))

(run-sources+ (stop-when-fields-decayed 50 Ex (vector3 0 0 (+ (* -0.5 sz) dpml)) 1e-9))

(if empty? (save-flux "refl-flux" refl))

(display-fluxes refl)
```
The following Bash shell script runs the two simulations, pipes the output to a file, and extracts the flux data into a separate file.

```sh
#!/bin/bash

meep empty?=true refl-quartz.ctl |tee flux0.out
grep flux1: flux0.out |cut -d , -f2- > flux0.dat

meep empty?=false refl-quartz.ctl |tee flux.out
grep flux1: flux.out |cut -d , -f2- > flux.dat
```

A plot of the reflectance spectrum based on the simulated data and the analytic Fresnel equations is generated using the Octave/Matlab script below. The plot is shown in the accompanying figure. There is agreement between the simulated and analytic results. Note that the reflectance spectra is plotted as a function of wavelength, not frequency from which the Meep data is obtained. Thus, the data points are not equally spaced: the spacing is smaller at low wavelengths (high frequencies) than at high wavelengths (low frequencies).

```matlab
f0 = dlmread("flux0.dat",",");
f = dlmread("flux.dat",",");

lambdas = 1./f(:,1);
R = -f(:,2)./f(:,2);

eps_silica = @(l) 1+(0.6961663*l.^2)./(l.^2-0.0684043^2)+(0.4079426*l.^2)./(l.^2-0.1162414^2)+(0.8974794*l.^2)./(l.^2-9.896161^2);
R_fresnel = @(l) abs((1-eps_silica(l).^0.5)./(1+eps_silica(l).^0.5)).^2;

plot(lambdas,R,'bo-',lambdas,R_fresnel(lambdas),'rs-');
xlabel("wavelength (um)");
ylabel("reflectance");
legend("meep","analytic");
```

<center>
![](../images/fused_quartz_reflectance_spectrum.png)
</center>

### Permittivity Function of an Artificial Dispersive Material

We will model a *uniform medium* of an artificial dispersive material. From the dispersion relation ω(k), we will compute the numerical ε(ω) via the formula:

$$\varepsilon(\omega) = \left( \frac{ck}{\omega} \right) ^2$$

We will then compare this with the analytical ε(ω) that we specified. The simulation script is in [material-dispersion.ctl](https://github.com/stevengj/meep/blob/master/scheme/examples/material-dispersion.ctl).

Since this is a uniform medium, our computational cell can actually be of *zero* size (i.e. one pixel), where we will use Bloch-periodic boundary conditions to specify the wavevector *k*.

```scm
(set! geometry-lattice (make lattice (size no-size no-size no-size)))
(set-param! resolution 20)
```

We will then fill all space with a dispersive material:

```scm
(set! default-material
      (make dielectric (epsilon 2.25)
            (E-susceptibilities 
             (make lorentzian-susceptibility
               (frequency 1.1) (gamma 1e-5) (sigma 0.5))
             (make lorentzian-susceptibility
               (frequency 0.5) (gamma 0.1) (sigma 2e-5))
             )))
```

corresponding to the dielectric function:

$$\varepsilon(\omega) = \varepsilon(2\pi f) = 2.25 + \frac{1.1^2 \cdot 0.5}{1.1^2 - f^2 -if \cdot 10^{-5}/2\pi} + \frac{0.5^2 \cdot 2\cdot 10^{-5}}{0.5^2 - f^2 -if \cdot 0.1 / 2\pi}$$

The real and imaginary parts of this dielectric function ε(ω) are plotted below:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-eps.png)
</center>

We can see that the f=1.1 resonance causes a large change in both the real and imaginary parts of ε around that frequency. In fact, there is a range of frequencies from 1.1 to 1.2161 where ε is *negative*. In this range, no propagating modes exist &mdash; it is actually a kind of electromagnetic band gap associated with polariton resonances in a material. For more information on the physics of such materials, see e.g. Chapter 14 of [Introduction to Solid State Physics](http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-EHEP000803.html) by C. Kittel.

On the other hand, the f=0.5 resonance, because the `sigma` numerator is so small, causes very little change in the real part of ε. Nevertheless, it generates a clear peak in the *imaginary* part of ε, corresponding to a resonant absorption peak.

Now, we'll set up the rest of the simulation. We'll specify a broadband $E_z$-polarized Gaussian source, create a list of *k* wavevectors that we want to compute ω(k) over, and compute the associated frequencies by using the `run-k-points` function:

```scm
(define-param fcen 1.0)
(define-param df 2.0)
(set! sources (list (make source
                      (src (make gaussian-src (frequency fcen) (fwidth df)))
                      (component Ez) (center 0 0 0))))
(define-param kmin 0.3)
(define-param kmax 2.2)
(define-param k-interp 99)
(define kpts (interpolate k-interp (list (vector3 kmin) (vector3 kmax))))
(define all-freqs (run-k-points 200 kpts)) ; a list of lists of frequencies  
```

The `run-k-points` function returns a *list of lists* of frequencies &mdash; one list of complex frequencies for each *k* point &mdash; which we store in the `all-freqs` variable. Finally, we want to loop over this list and print out the corresponding ε via the ratio (ck/ω)$^2$ as described above. To do this, we will use the Scheme `map` function, which applies a given function to every element of a list (or lists), and since we have a list of lists we'll actually nest two `map` functions:

```scm
(map (lambda (kx fs)
       (map (lambda (f)
              (print "eps:, " (real-part f) ", " (imag-part f)
                     ", " (sqr (/ kx f)) "\n"))
            fs))
     (map vector3-x kpts) all-freqs)
```

Alternatively we could just read all of the frequencies into Octave/Matlab and compute the ratios there. After running the program with

```sh
unix% meep material-dispersion.ctl | tee material-dispersion.out
```

we can then `grep` for the frequencies and the computed dielectric function, and plot it. First, let's plot the dispersion relation ω(k) for the real part of ω:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-bands.png)
</center>

The red circles are the computed points from Meep, whereas the blue line is the analytical band diagram from the specified ε(ω). As you can see, we get *two* bands at each *k*, separated by a polaritonic gap (shaded yellow). This dispersion relation can be thought of as the interaction (anti-crossing) between the light line of the ambient ε=2.25 material (dashed black line) and the horizontal line corresponding to the phonon resonance.

Similarly, the computed and analytical real parts of the dielectric function are given by:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-epsre.png)
</center>

which shows excellent agreement between the analytical (blue line) and numerical (red circles) calculations. The imaginary part, however, is more subtle:

<center>
![](../images/Material-dispersion-epsim.png)
</center>

The blue line is the analytical calculation from above and the red circles are the numerical value from Meep &mdash; why is the agreement so poor? There is nothing wrong with Meep, and this is *not* a numerical error. The problem is simply that we are comparing apples and oranges.

The blue line is the analytical calculation of ε(ω) for a *real* frequency ω which corresponds to solutions with a *complex* wavevector *k*, whereas Meep is computing ε at a *complex* ω for a *real* wavevector *k*. So, the correct comparison is to plug Meep's *complex* ω into the analytical formula for ε(ω), which results in the green lines on the graph that fall almost on top of the red circles.

Why did our comparison of the *real* part of ε look so good, then? The reason is that ε(ω) at real and complex values of ω are closely related by the analytic properties of ε. In particular, because ε is an analytic function on the real-ω axis, adding a *small* imaginary part to ω as we are doing here does not change ε by much. The losses are small for all of the computed *k* points. The change was only significant for the imaginary ε because the imaginary ε was small to begin with.
